feat/add blog post for status page technical preview release (#904)
SovereignCloudStack/website: _i18n/en/_posts/blog/2024-04-18-status-page-tech-preview-release.md

---
layout: post
title: "SCS Status Page - Technical Preview Released"
category: "tech"
author:
  - "Sebastian Kaupe"
avatar:
  - "avatar-gonicus.jpg"
---

> Now matter how thorough your preparation and processes, services experiencing limited capabilities and straight-out outages *will* be part your business of being a cloud provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter how thorough your preparation and processes, services experiencing limited capabilities and straight-out outages *will* be part your business of being a cloud provider.
```

To define and manage these incidents, the SCS project so far provided an [OpenAPI definition](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/status-page-openapi) as well as an [implementation](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/status-page-api) for a status API server, acting as a repository to collect any incidents that impact the components of your SCS setup. And while its REST interface is certainly comprehensive, fiddling around with HTTP calls and JSON results is not exactly a process one can consider *"customer-friendly"*.

> ## The SCS Status Page is now available as a Technical Preview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The SCS Status Page is available as a Technical Preview now
```

For the last few months, we've therefore been working on our first release of our Status Page, the web frontend to our status API server. The status page takes the API server's REST interface and provides a web view that your customers and employees can just look at in their browser—no curl calls or similar necessary.

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:100%; max-width: 986px;">
    {% asset 'blog/status-page-tech-preview-release/default-view.png' class="figure-img w-100 mx-auto" %}
</figure>
<p class="fw-semibold text-center">SCS Status Page default view</p>

> If you've ever seen a status page before, this page design will surely be immediately familiar to you. We have, however, implemented for our technical preview a few things not commonly seen in the status pages we've encountered in our research.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've ever seen a status page before, the page design will surely be familiar to you immediately. However for our technical preview we've implemented a few things not commonly seen in the status pages we've encountered in our research.
```

    {% asset 'blog/status-page-tech-preview-release/table-view.png' class="figure-img w-100" alt="an image of the status page with incidents per day listed in a table"%}
    <figcaption>SCS Status Page table view with non-incident days filtered out</figcaption>
</figure>

And because the tables for your SCS system would hopefully mostly feature days without ongoing incidents, making your tables long and boring, we've added an option to remove all such days, giving you a much shorter, easily digestable table view of how your SCS environment has been doing.

Now, this is a *technical preview*, so not all work we want to be included in our first full release is currently done. Theming is currently somewhat limited, the About text and imprint can only be changed directly in the sources and the implementation in the background has one or two slightly wonky spots. However, we think our implementation is far along enough to be handed over to you, to experiment with it and hopefully provide us with some feedback on how we are doing. Check [further down below](#get-involved) to see how to get involved!

## The Future of the Status Page

> For the moment (and our first complete release), the status page is a tool to purely view the status of your SCS environment. We have, however, a whole mountain of plans and ideas to implement in the future, chief amongst them the ability to create and update incidents and impacts for authenticated users, turning the status page into *the* tool to interact with the status API server. Additionally, we plan to extend the API specification, API server and frontend to schedule and display pre-planned maintenance sessions, allowing you to inform your users of expected outages well beforehand.

Reviewer: I would likely rephrase it a bit, since from the sentence '[...]the status page is a tool to purely view the status of your SCS environment.[...]" one could get the impression the status page is displaying live status and is somewhat hooked into the observability.

Author: This sentence has been rephrased. Is this better:

```
For the moment (and our first complete release), the status page is limited to just displaying the incident data of your status API server.
```

Reviewer: I think, you misunderstood me. 
What I meant: the status page is not intended to report live status based on an observability source but intended to report status based on what is fed into it. This is not a limitation of the first release but simply the scope of the overall project. It does not 'report the status of the SCS environment' it reports the status of whatever is fed into it - this can be status of a SCS environment if that is what is fed into it. I'll submit a suggestion.

> For the moment (and our first complete release), the status page is limited to just displaying the incident data of your status API server. We have, however, a whole mountain of plans and ideas to implement in the future, chief amongst them the ability to create and update incidents and impacts for authenticated users, turning the status page into *the* tool to interact with the status API server. Additionally, we plan to extend the API specification, API server and frontend to schedule and display pre-planned maintenance sessions, allowing you to inform your users of expected outages well beforehand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the moment, and the scope of the first complete release, the status page frontend displays the incident data present in your status API server. We have a whole mountain of plans and ideas to implement in the future, chief amongst them the ability to create and update incidents and impacts for authenticated users, turning the status page into *the* tool to interact with the status API server. Additionally, we plan to extend the API specification, API server and frontend to schedule and display pre-planned maintenance sessions, allowing you to inform your users of expected outages well beforehand.
```

Alongside actual incident management, we want to add a notification service to server and frontend, allowing you to subscribe to push messages or e-mail notifications; or consume any updates to your SCS status at your own pace using RSS.

And many, many ideas more, such as additional facilities for disabled users (e. g. a high-contrast mode or colorblind modes specific to different types of color blindness), user-specified time ranges, customizable filter options or additional REST API endpoints. If incident management is part of your duties, make sure to have an eye on further announcements and developments on our status API and page.

## Get Involved!

> You can find the Git repository of the status page [on GitHub](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/status-page-web). The README file includes instructions on how to construct a container image from the sources and how to configure the status page according to your needs/status API server setup. You have no status API server yet? Not a problem—the status page repo comes with some example data included and you can set a flag to make the status page use that, allowing you to try out the page on its own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find the Git repository of the status page [on GitHub](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/status-page-web). The [README](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/status-page-web/blob/main/README.md) file includes instructions on how to construct a container image from the sources and how to configure the status page according to your needs/status API server setup. You have no status API server yet? Not a problem—the status page repo comes with some example data included and you can set a flag to make the status page use that, allowing you to try out the page on its own.
```
